Jake meets with Col. Quaritch, who is lifting weights. The Colonel tells Jake he's looked up his service record and was impressed with what he accomplished on some of his tours, including one in Venezuela. The Colonel warns Jake about the dangers awaiting him on Pandora. He also states his belief that the Avatar Program is a joke but that it offers an opportunity for a unique reconnaissance mission: If Jake can find out and tell the Colonel what he wants to know about the natives (how to persuade them to move away from the unobtanium ore deposits and how to hit them hard if they won't), the Colonel will see to it that Jake gets the surgery he needs to regain use of his legs. The Colonel climbs into an AMP suit -- a bipedal exoskeleton used for missions on Pandora -- and moves off.

Relinked with his avatar, Jake flies over Pandora's surface in Trudy's gunship, along with Grace, Norm, and others. The team lands in a forest, where Grace and Norm begin to take samples of the flora and make measurements. Jake is distracted by his surroundings and wanders into a field of helicoradian flowers, which are quite tall and shrink at Jake's touch. Trouble arrives when a titanothere -- a heavily-armored, hammerheaded creature -- confronts Jake. Grace orders him to stand his ground and not shoot, or else the animal will get angry and charge. His armor is too thick for guns to have any effect anyway. Jake successfully holds his ground, but only because another beast, a panther-like thanator, has approached him from behind and has caused the titanotheres to retreat and surround their young. The thanator then turns to Jake. Grace tells him to run, and he's pursued by the thanator in a chase that separates Jake from his crew. He loses his gun and is downed by the animal, but frees himself by releasing his backpack. Ultimately, the chase leads to a waterfall, where Jake jumps to safety, leaving the thanator roaring above him.

Jake's crew searches for him but Trudy says they'll have to return to base since night ops are not allowed. Grace says he won't last the night.

It's now night and we see Jake sharpening a long stick into a spear Jake is being watched from above, this time by a Na'vi. The Na'vi aims an arrow at Jake and is about to shoot, but decides against it when small, ethereal, luminescent creatures land on her bow. (Later we learn they are "very pure spirits," also known as the "seeds of Eywa", the Na'vis all-powerful god.) The archer retreats. Jake is stalked by a pack of viperwolves. He dips the end of his spear into a combustible pitch-like liquid. He lights the end and uses it as a a torch against the viperwolves, who encircle him, teeth bared, jaws gnashing. The animals attack Jake; he fights back, kills some, and is taken down by others. The archer who was observing Jake joins the battle on his side. She kills some viperwolves and causes the rest to flee. She tenderly puts out of their misery some whimpering wounded animals and says prayers over them. Jake attempts to thank her for helping him fight off the attackers. She meets his thanks with scorn, tells him all this is his fault, that they did not need to die, and that he should "go back" to where he came from. Jake asks if she feels that way, why she helped him. "You have a strong heart. No fear," she explains. "But stupid!"

Jake attempts to follow his rescuer up into a tree, asks for her help, and says he wants to learn. He's repulsed and told to "go back," that sky people can't be taught. Just then, the seeds of Eywa reappear and start to land on the nervous Jake. He asks what they are. "Very pure spirits," she replies, and Jake is covered by them, making an impression on his companion. When the seeds drift off, she relents and tells him to come with her.
